[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We took two simple
black boxes like this.
Inside is a very
simple electric circuit
with a few diodes,
oscillator, EEPROM,
some resistors and capacitors.
Basically, that's it.
We wrapped one in aluminum foil.
We put it in an
electrically-grounded Faraday
cage.
And the other-- we sat on a
tabletop around which four very
well-qualified
meditators, highly
inner self-managed
individuals sit.
And they go into a
deep meditative state.
They cleanse the environment.
They make it essentially
a sacred space,
using their
mind-cleansing procedures
and their intentions.
And then one of the four
speaks the specific intention
for this device.
The intention is to influence a
particular target experiment--
might be to increase
the pH of purified water
by one full pH unit or to
decrease the pH by one full pH
unit.
We had used these devices
on all those experiments
and have been
robustly successful.
In the meditative process--
then after one speaks
the particular intention,
it's held various ways by
the four for maybe 15 minutes
and then so be it.
It's let go.
And then a subsidiary
intention is
stated to seal that
imprint into the device.
We take one of these devices
with this aluminum foil.
We put it in a soft package.
We put in a FedEx packet.
We ship it 2,000 miles
away to the laboratory we
we're using up in Minnesota.
And as soon as it
arrives there, it
goes into its own electrically
routed Faraday cage.
The next day, we do the
same with the control.
The experiment is running.
And basically, then one
just takes the device out,
sets it beside the experiment
within 6 inches to a foot,
and turns it on for
a period of time.
That's it.
Now, we learned over
some period of time
that there was another factor.
We found that the use of these--
we call them intention
imprinted electrical devices.
The continued use of
this somehow conditions
the space to some higher
level of symmetry.
And we start getting
new phenomena.
That is, the devices work.
That is, the pH,
which is normal,
starts rising one full pH
unit if that was the imprint
or starts dropping.
>> Living system-- you go
plus or minus 1/2 a pH unit
in either direction,
you're dead on both ends.
So these are very big effects.
So, for example, in
terms of healing,
one of the things that we
ultimately expect to do
is to be able to broadcast
this so that we create
an environment
where people are 500
or 1,000 miles away
or 10,000 miles away,
wherein they can
use their intention
to enhance their health.
>> The question is when you're
studying the mind/matter
interface, how do you
go about studying it?
From a naive point of view,
you would think that maybe we
should just get
a feather and see
if we can make it float or
get an object and push it.
Something like that.
The thing is, though,
that happens so rarely.
Even spontaneously, it
happens extremely rarely.
It basically never
happens in the laboratory.
So I think the reason that the
mind/matter interface does not
work very well on a
large physical object
is because that object has
an enormous amount of inertia
to stay where it is.
You might be thinking thoughts
at it, saying, push, move.
And it's thinking thoughts
back at you saying,
no, I don't want to.
Well, it would take an enormous
amount of physical force
in order to make it move.
So back in the 1600s,
when Francis Bacon
was developing
empiricism in science,
he actually wrote
in one of his books
about ways of studying the
mind/matter interaction
and mentioned dice
as a possibility.
Because every time
a die bounces,
it can trace all the way
down to quantum events, which
cause it to turn this
way versus that way.
So if it bounces
a bunch of times,
it basically becomes a quantum
mechanical uncertainty, even
in something as
large as the die.
So back in the
1930s, researchers
started using dice as a form
to see if mind can somehow
get into the quantum uncertainty
and bias what is happening
in the die as it was rolling.
Around the 1960s, when
electronics came around,
someone had the
idea of simulating
a die in electronic circuits.
And the reason that
that became useful
was because it became very easy
to measure precisely what was
happening in every single bounce
or equivalent of a bounce.
And you could record
it automatically.
You can create new
kinds of experiments
where you didn't
have to worry anymore
about whether the
recording was correct
or whether the die
became unbalanced.
So random number generators,
modern versions of it
were created as a
refinement of techniques
that had been used
in the laboratory
for many, many years.
>> And could you go over some
of your findings on that?
>> One type of random
number generator experiment
that's been conducted
many, many times,
hundreds of times over the
past four decades or so, since
around the 1960s, has been
a random generator that only
produces sequences
of random bits--
0s and 1s, like flipping coins.
And you would simply ask
somebody to press a button.
It would produce 200 bits.
And you would ask
them to say, well,
try to make it produce
more 1 bits than 0 bits.
And when you take the
entire body of literature,
all of the hundreds
of experiments
that have been done, you
can ask a single question--
did it matter that people were
trying to push it towards 1s
or push it towards 0s?
And the overall answer
is, yes, it does matter,
that somehow intention is
correlated with the operation,
with the output of these
random number generators,
such that if you
wish for more 1s,
somehow the generators
produce more 1s.
The last analysis
that I did, which
looked at all of
these experiments
that the final analysis
is, 50,000 to 1,
the odds against
chance are 50,000 to 1
that the behavior of the
random number generators
would go in the
direction that they
did that were consistent
with what intention
was wishing them to do.
>> So when they talk about
in quantum physics being
a completely arbitrary
and random process,
what they're not accounting
for is the extraordinary effect
of human thought,
of human intention.
>> When the OJ Simpson trial
was going on, lots of people are
watching television, because
of the courtroom drama that was
unfolding.
And [INAUDIBLE]
intuited that there must
be a lot of intention going on.
>> I'll preface it with why
we thought of doing that
in the first place.
So for 30 years, people
in the laboratory
have been taking the random
number generator and the human
and asking the human to try to
interact with the generator.
And we see small effects.
And then after a while, after
repeating it over and over
again, basically it gets boring.
What else does it mean?
One of the implications
of what it means
is that we're not
dealing-- when we
deal with stuff
in the laboratory,
it's an artificial and
constrained environment.
It's extremely difficult
to produce real intention
and real motivation
in a laboratory,
but that's where these
big things happen.
So we're looking for ways of
getting out of the laboratory,
but still maintaining control
over what we're measuring.
So you take a random
number generator
into an environment like
a group that's meditating,
long-term meditators.
They know what they're doing.
They become extremely
coherent as a group.
And I'm thinking, well,
that would be a good place
to take a random
number generator.
Because maybe their
intention is infiltrating out
into the environment and
creating a form of order,
mind order that would
be reflected in matter.
And so we'll take our
form of matter, which
is a random number generator.
We know how to look for
order in these things,
because the only thing that
can happen in a random number
generator that's unusual
is to become less random.
So we use statistical
ways of detecting that.
And sure enough, my colleagues,
Roger Nelson, Dick Bierman,
many others around the world
have taken the random number
generators within groups that
are doing coherent things.
And sure enough, the
random number generators
become coherent.
So the matter becomes ordered.
And then I started
thinking, well,
what would happen if we're not
dealing with groups of a couple
dozen, but with hundreds of
millions of people, all of whom
had their attention focused
suddenly on something?
And as it turned out, that
about a month from the time
I had that thought was going
to be the reading of the OJ
Simpson verdict.
So this was an unusual
point in human history,
I think, in that people
knew far in advance
that within a
fraction of a second,
either saying the words
guilty or not guilty,
something of very high
interest would occur,
which would attract hundreds
of millions of people live.
I figured, OK, we have to do
this as an experiment then.
I had three random number
generators running in my lab.
And I asked a colleague to
run a generator in Amsterdam
and another in Princeton.
We had five random
number generators going.
I figured it's a
worldwide effect.
Maybe we would see a
change in the generators
as we approach that moment in
time when the verdict was read.
So we ran the
generators afterwards
and evaluated the results.
And sure enough, we saw a
spike with odds of 1,000 to 1
at actually two places.
One was when the camera switched
from outside the courthouse
to inside the chambers,
it was a huge rise
of attention,
which was reflected
in the random generators.
And then at the moment
that the verdict was read,
it was this large
spike of coherence
and all five generators at once.
So this was taking an idea that
we had seen in the laboratory
and scaling it up to
the world at large.
And it appeared to work.
>> This leads
naturally to wonder,
are people affecting the world
of reality that they see?
You betcha, they are.
Every single one of us affects
the reality that we see.
Even if we try to hide
from that and play victim,
we all are doing it.
>> Just tell me where you are.
OK, good.
But hurry, will you please?
Because these bottles
are giving me a headache.
>> 10 minutes.
[SCREAMING]
>> Our subway exhibit comes
to us from Japan and Mr.
Masaru Emoto.
Mr. Emoto became
terribly interested
in the molecular structure
of water and what affects it.
Now, water is the most
receptive of the four elements.
Mr. Emoto thought,
perhaps it would
respond to non-physical events.
So he set up a
series of studies,
applied mental stimuli,
and photographed it
with a microscope.
>> [SPEAKING JAPANESE]
>> In one sample of water, we
dropped about 0.5 cc's onto
each 50 Petri dishes.
Then we take those
50 Petri dishes
and freeze them in a
freezer at minus 25 degrees
Celsius for about three hours.
We take those frozen
samples into a refrigerator
that is set at minus 5
degrees Celsius where
a microscope with
a camera is set up.
There we take photographs
of each of the 50 water
drops individually.
We first take
photographs of water
that we did not put
any information in.
Then we take the
water with information
and do the same
procedure just described.
We take those
before-and-after photographs
and compare the differences.
When we projected the feeling
of love and thanks to water,
we made the most
beautiful crystal.
Times like this--
I think water is at peace.
>> This first picture is
a picture of water from
the Fujiwara Dam.
And this picture
is the same water
after receiving a blessing
from a Zen Buddhist monk.
Now, in this next
series of pictures,
Mr. Emoto printed
out words, taped them
to bottles of distilled water,
and left them out overnight.
This first photograph is a
picture of the pure distilled
water, just the
essence of itself.
These subsequent
photographs, as you can see,
are each different.
This is the "Chi of Love."
And we move along
here to "Thank You."
And you can see where he taped
that to this bottle here.
But if you read Japanese,
you already knew that.
Mr. Emoto speaks of the thought
or intent being the driving
force in all of this.
The science of how that
actually affects the molecules
is unknown, except to the
water molecules, of course.
And it's really
fascinating when you
keep in mind that 90%
of our bodies are water.
>> Makes you wonder, doesn't it?
If thoughts can
do that to water,
imagine what our
thoughts can do to us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Recently, there was the
huge tsunami that happened
in the ocean.
And you wrote the
prayer for that.
That was great.
Thank you.
I've noticed that when
something like that happens,
it seems like people
from around the world--
suddenly there's this
outpouring of support and help.
There's something about
helping on the world level that
seems to help lift everyone.
But what do you make of that?
>> [SPEAKING JAPANESE]
>> Through my 10
years of research,
I have been visually sending
the message to people all over
the world that people's
prayers and thoughts can affect
reality, no matter
where they are.
So because this idea had
already been accepted
by many in the world,
people probably,
thought, oh, so
that's how it works.
If we try, our energy
can reach there.
Then we should all pray.
And this is the
reason why there are
no great outbreaks of
infectious disease as a result
of the tsunami disaster.
With a repetition
of similar actions,
people may start regaining
faith in prayers.
Therefore, in other words, there
may be more disasters, be it
natural or man made,
that would create
more casualties along the way.
Through these
experiences, more people
may be able to perceive
these problems as their own,
that they are all
responsible as well.
>> If we really learn to love,
these particular problems
of separateness will just
disappear like a flimsy mist
when the morning
sun comes about.
>> So we do the
OJ Simpson thing.
And we have an amazing result.
A number of years go by.
And a number of us-- more
of us are getting interested
in this thing, this kind of
idea of taking random number
generators and seeing whether
we can detect the world reacting
to it.
So an unhappy event
occurred where Princess Di
died in an accident.
And somewhat similar
to the OJ thing,
everyone knew a week
in advance that there
was going to be a live
broadcast of the funeral.
And this was such a
shock around the world,
that we knew that it would
probably attract something
like a billion viewers live.
So this case, we had 12
colleagues, each of whom
had a similar kind of
random number generator
around the world.
And we all got together
and recorded data before,
during, and after the funeral
and came up with a formal test
to see whether or not there was
a deviation in the generators.
And as it turned out, there
was, a significant deviation
among all of these
generators around the world.
Another year or so goes by.
And we start thinking,
these one-shot experiments
are interesting.
But we're going to miss things
that happened spontaneously.
It would have been
interesting to know
what would have happened when
the first news broadcast went
out that Princess Di had died.
So this generated the notion
of the Global Consciousness
Project, which is headed by
Roger Nelson at Princeton.
And the idea is to take
random number generators,
locate them around the world,
run them 24 hours a day.
And every five minutes,
send all the data
up to a single web
server at Princeton.
So we have a continuous record.
And we've had it
now for eight years,
a continuous record
of randomness
from around the world.
We have data now for two
basic types of events.
We have planned events like Y2K.
It was, again, a moment
of a stroke of midnight
where everyone was going to be
paying attention in each time
zone.
And we also have
spontaneous events like 9/11
that weren't planned.
But we're able to
look at all of them
now in terms of what
happened to this randomness,
this physical measure of
randomness around the world
when a lot of minds suddenly
became focused on something.
And the short story
of this is that we
have hundreds of events now,
both planned and unplanned.
And it is very clear that,
overall, the randomness is not
as random as it ought
to be, by theory, when
these events are occurring.
Large-scale events that
attract a lot of attention
create a certain
mental coherence,
which seems to be
reflected in what's
going on in random
generators around the world.
So that's one thing of interest.
The second thing
of interest is--
and we noticed this
first when 9/11 occurred.
We analyzed it very closely
to see what was happening.
There were 37 random
generators running that day.
We go into the data.
And you look at it over
the course of the day--
9/11.
You find a very unusual
statistical structure
in the data.
You find a six-standard
deviation change.
It's as though if you
think about the results
of this experiment
like a bell shape,
we're constantly recreating
a bell-shaped curve.
That's what the
statistics look like.
And we're interested in,
how does the bell ring?
How does it swing?
How does it vibrate over time?
That's the way of thinking
about the statistic.
On 9/11, the bell
rang extremely loud.
It swung hard in one direction.
And it swung hard in the
other direction, basically.
And then we thought,
well, that's unusual.
So we compared it to other days.
We started comparing it to
more or more days around 9/11.
It turns out that 9/11,
within the year 2001,
was the loudest
ringing of the bell,
while it was probably also the
most focused day of attention
for 2001 and maybe since then.
The other thing
that was interest
is that the bell started
to swing before 8:30
in the morning Eastern Time.
It began to swing noticeably
before the events unfolded,
which suggested something
like a premonition.
There was something beginning
to build statistically
that then basically
exploded at them
and when the events unraveled.
But something was a premonition.
>> One of the most interesting
experiments with random event
generators occurred when
it was really out of time.
Some of the Princeton
investigators
and some of the
other ones decided
that they would try
to see whether or not
you could affect a random
machine after it had run.
So they converted it.
Instead of having a computer
with a visual screen,
they had a computerized
situation that was audiotapes.
And they had it with
clicks in the left ear
and clicks in the right ear.
And they already played
this with nobody listening
to it so that it
had already ran.
They put that in a vault.
And they then gave the already
run tape to a participant
and said, take it home.
I want you to listen to it.
And I want you to make more
left ear clicks than right ear
clicks with it.
Send your intention to it.
So the person did.
They handed back the tape.
And they played it.
And lo and behold--
and they played the
one in the vault, too.
And they discovered that
they were both the same.
And they both had more left
clicks than right clicks.
So what was going on here?
Well, it wasn't as though the
person who was the participant
had actually affected it at the
moment he was listening to it.
His thoughts and
his attention had
moved back down the
timeline and affected it
at the moment it was generated.
>> Most people don't affect
reality in a consistent,
substantial way, because
they don't believe they can.
>> Cannot believe people who
say that none of this is so.
"None of this is so" is relative
to them and their following.
What would you rather choose?
That it isn't so or it is so?
And who bags the truth?
Who holds the bag of truth--
someone out there
that's saying this
is impossible or somebody out
there that said, absolutely is?
Who holds the bag of truth?
We do.
>> I like the placebo effect,
because it has to do with
a person's acceptance.
It's really what it's about.
For example, they
took these group
of people that had
Parkinson's disease.
And in Parkinson's
disease, there's
a problem in the brain
with making dopamine.
There's a little nuclei
called a substantia nigra
that stops making dopamine.
And of course, when
there's no dopamine,
the body starts to
respond differently.
We have musculoskeletal
problems.
We have tremors and what's
called intention tremors.
So we have foot shuffling,
or we have pill rolling.
And these are muscular
actions that supersede
our voluntary control.
We can't control those.
So I took a group of people
that had Parkinson's disease.
And they said to
them, now, listen,
we have this injection that's
going to make you better.
Well, 50% of the people that got
the injection, all of a sudden,
lost all their
motor dysfunction.
In other words, they
weren't pill rolling.
They weren't shuffling
their feet anymore.
They didn't have
intention tremors
when they were
grabbing for objects.
So the doctor said, well, that's
a great example of a placebo.
It's all in your mind.
But when they checked
the dopamine levels that
were produced in the brain, the
interesting thing that happened
was that the brain
started making dopamine,
because they accepted
that they were well.
In other words, their thought
that they were well allowed
them to begin to be well.
And if you're being well
in the quantum field,
the observer has to
supply the chemistry
to match who you're being.
>> The issue of whether we do a
detailed statement of intention
or if we do it in such a
way that we leave it open
for the universe to
find a way to do it,
generally it's the latter.
Certainly for the
water, it's the latter.
For example, one of the
four sitters, meditators,
thinks of it when
the intention is red,
and it's to increase the pH.
Person visualizes a
thermometer and it's going up.
That's it, OK?
So each uses its
own visualization.
But in this particular
case, then, it's
just a pure intention.
And the intention seems to
act like a true thermodynamic
potential, every bit as much
as pressure and temperature
and the universe.
That thermodynamic
driving force,
if you'll call it
that for intention,
then acts on the
available processes.
And those processes
do their thing.
And the effect happens.
>> Well, we do create our
own reality all the time,
have always done so.
But the type of reality that we
create with all its limitations
and its suffering, disease,
lack, accidents, vicissitudes
of various kinds--
that mirrors the consciousness
that we express through.
So we are creating our
own reality every day,
though we find that very
hard to accept with--
there's nothing more
exquisitely pleasant
than to blame somebody
else for the way we are.
It's her fault or his
fault. It's the system.
It's God.
It's my parents.
It's the stage.
Whatever.
But in quantum physics, we're
brought back to reality.
Whatever way we observe
the world around
us is what comes back to us.
And the reason why my
life, for instance,
is so lacking in joy and
happiness and fulfillment
is because my focus is lacking
in those same things exactly.
Now, what we're
talking about here
in creating our own reality--
it's not something
[SNAPS FINGERS] like that.
We're talking about what is
deeply and fully accepted
in my being about life.
That slowly manifests
itself every day.
So if I go into a
grocery store and I
want to manifest $100 bill
to pay for my groceries,
I'm not talking about that.
I'm talking about
something that's
much more slow to come
into manifestation.
But certainly, the life that we
experience-- if we're victims,
we should ask ourselves,
have I a victim mentality?
If I'm continually meeting
misfortunes and accidents
and tragedies, maybe
it's because my mentality
is basically attuned to
accepting that this is the way
life is, and so it happens.
Now, why can I not
achieve those things?
Fundamentally,
through lack of focus.
>> The average person loses
their attention span every 6
to 10 seconds per minute.
>> When one wants
to focus intent,
you want to be a
singleness of mind.
That's why some of the
old occult teachings
teach people to
focus on a flame--
a match flame, in
fact, so that you
learn to bring your attention
into a very sharp channel
so that the energy
density becomes greater.
>> To create something like $100
bill or a gold coin in my hand
demands that I have to have
absolute control of my thoughts
and absolute acceptance
that it will happen.
And if we do combine
those two things--
and they're very
difficult to achieve,
but not at all impossible--
then they will happen.
Skeptics will laugh
and scoff at that.
But again, time is on our side.
And science, I think,
is also on our side.
Because it's showing
us more and more
that this is, in fact,
how reality behaves.
It is absolutely attendant
upon a thought that is fully
and deeply felt and accepted.
>> The mind is
structured in layers,
just like the universe is
structured in layers from
superficial to profound.
And if we use the mind in
a very superficial level
of ordinary thought, we
have very limited power.
We can barely move a speck
of dust across a tabletop
without using our hands.
So weak can consciousness be.
But at the deepest
level of consciousness,
consciousness creates universe.
Unified field theories endow
this universal unified field
of consciousness
with such creativity,
that it's constantly
effervescing universes,
like bubbles from
effervescent ginger ale,
an uncountable infinity
of simultaneously emerging
universes.
Many of these are duds.
They don't last very long.
But many of them undergo
cosmological inflation,
exponential expansion.
They spawn galaxies
by the trillions.
>> But we always
wonder, then, don't we,
when we wish for all of us to
be able to heal with a touch,
and to raise the dead, and
to manifest a loaf of bread
in our hand?
And we always wonder
why we can't do that.
But we can never ask a
question that we don't already
know the answer to.
And the answer is because we
don't believe we could do it.
And it interferes
with our agenda
of our own personal
addictions that define us.
We have never had enough
time to care for anyone
else other than our own
emotional, addictive needs.